**An Analysis of Shielding and Healing from a Scholar's Perspective**

By Felicific Calculus

# Introduction #

I am a "Scholar main". I love this job. But I also feel that it is sometimes misunderstood. In particular, the Scholar's role as a provider of shields is often overemphasised. To be sure, shielding occupies a central page in the Scholar's spell book. Shields are awesome. They let us do things that cannot be achieved through ordinary healing. But they also have a downside: our shielding spells (*Adloquium* and *Succor*) are less efficient, in the sense that they cost more per potency, than our non-shielding healing abilities (*Excogitation*, *Indomitability*, etc.). The Scholar thus frequently faces a difficult decision: to shield or not to shield? My aim in this essay to shed some light on this thorny question. I shall offer an analysis of shielding and healing from a Scholar's perspective. Shielding and healing have more in common than is commonly supposed, but they also differ in two important respects. Understanding these differences helps us to identify situations in which shielding is the better option, but also situations where straight healing is to be preferred.

# How Shielding is Like Healing #

Let's begin with some fundamentals. A character's health is measured by *HP* (or "hit points"). This determines how much damage (or how many "hits") the character can take before dying. Shields effectively give a character more HP, increasing the amount of damage she can take, though this additional HP is not currently displayed in the game's UI. (I understand the UI may be updated in Shadowbringers to also show HP provided by shields, which will be a welcome improvement.) It is useful therefore to distinguish different types of HP. I will use the following terminology and abbreviations:

- *Actual HP (AHP):* HP that is displayed in the UI (in the character's parameter bar, in the party list, and so on).
- *Virtual HP (VHP):* HP that is provided by shields.
- *Effective HP (EHP):* the sum of AHP and VHP.

When a character takes damage, her VHP is consumed first, until it is fully depleted, and then her AHP is consumed. A character dies when her VHP and her AHP (and therefore her EHP) are reduced to zero. It is primarily the responsibility of the healers to prevent this from happening (though other classes can contribute also, by using damage mitigation, avoiding unnecessary damage, and so on).

An important concept to grasp is that shielding is essentially just another form of healing. The way these are represented in the game can make it seem like healing and shielding are very different. Healing reverses the effect of taking damage, by restoring the lost HP, whereas shielding prevents damage from being taken in the first place. However, if we think of it in another way, both healing and shielding have the same effect, namely, raising EHP. Ultimately, EHP is all that matters. A character will survive an attack if, and only if, she has enough EHP (i.e., her EHP is greater than the damage received). In this respect, it makes no difference how her EHP is constituted by AHP and VHP. It is perhaps tempting to think that, as "prevention is better than cure", shielding is preferable to healing. But this is really an illusion, created by the fact that AHP is all we see in the game, while VHP is "invisible". When we think in terms of EHP, rather than AHP, the distinction between "prevention" and "cure" makes little sense. Our goal is to ensure that our party has enough EHP to survive, and often the most efficient way to achieve this goal is by healing, not by shielding.

As an aside, this is why I dislike the "proactive vs reactive" healer dichotomy. Often it is said that Scholars specialise in "proactive" healing, whereas White Mages specialise in "reactive" healing. Scholars have to anticipate upcoming damage, while White Mages wait for damage to happen and then react to it. In fact, *all* good healing is preemptive. The entire point of healing is to ensure that the party will survive upcoming damage. If the damage stops coming, we can stop healing. Thus *all* healers, even White Mages, need to plan ahead. How much healing or shielding the party needs *now* is determined, not by the damage they have taken in the past, but by the damage they will take in the future. Suppose, for example, your party has just taken a big hit, reducing them all to around 10% HP. That looks scary. Your first instinct might be to top them up to 100% immediately. But if there won't be any more damage for another 30 seconds, then there's really no hurry. A HoT (healing over time) may be perfectly adequate in this situation.

# Overhealing and Overshielding #

Having emphasised the commonality between healing and shielding (both raise EHP), I should point out that there are nonetheless two important differences. As noted above, healing raises AHP and shielding raises VHP. Although AHP and VHP are both components of EHP, they work in different ways, and this creates differences between healing and shielding.

The first difference is that AHP is *capped*, but VHP is not. There is a maximum amount of AHP that a character can have. Any healing in excess of this maximum is "overhealing", and is entirely useless, a waste of resources. Healing can only be effective (not overhealing) when a character's current AHP is below its maximum. On the other hand, VHP has no maximum amount. So shielding *always* increases EHP.

This does not mean, however, that shielding is always effective. For there is a second important difference: AHP is *permanent*, but VHP is not. By saying that it is permanent I mean it will last until the character takes damage. If a character never takes damage, her AHP will not go down. The same is not true for VHP. Almost all shields have a limited duration (the only exception I can think of is the shield provided by *Protection*). If a character takes no damage during this period, then the shield will simply "drop off" and VHP will return to zero. This means that shielding can also lead to a form of overhealing, which we might call "overshielding". A shield that merely drops off without absorbing any damage is also useless.

That overhealing is inefficient may be fairly widely recognised (though this doesn't stop some healers from doing it excessively). What is perhaps less widely known is that overshielding is equally bad. You might think that a shield is like *insurance*: it's good to have even when you don't have to use it. Even if your home never catches on fire, you might still be glad to have fire insurance. But there is a crucial difference here. Insurance derives its value from the fact that the future is *unpredictable*. If you can be certain that it never rains where you live, then it would be foolish for you to buy flood insurance. However, the encounters in this game are highly scripted, and most damage is therefore *predictable*. Of course your teammates will sometimes make mistakes and take damage they could have avoided. But even this is predictable to an extent. You needn't worry about your teammates accidentally standing in AoE damage when there is no AoE damage to stand in. And in any case, even in circumstances where insurance might be helpful, it doesn't follow that you should purchase it at *any* price. If shields were free, then shielding teammates against accidental damage would be entirely sensible. But shields are not free. So it is more a matter of weighing up costs and benefits. Is the probability of a teammate dying to accidental damage sufficiently high to justify the cost of a shield?

# When Shields Shine #

The first difference between AHP and VHP mentioned above (i.e., that only AHP is capped) means that shielding has an advantage over healing in two specific kinds of situation.

The most obvious situations in which shields shine are those that involve preventing otherwise lethal damage. As I've said, whether a character will survive an attack is determined by her EHP. As long she has enough EHP, she'll be fine. In some cases, however, the damage done by an attack will exceed the character's maximum AHP. In this case, it is simply impossible to raise her EHP high enough by healing alone. The extra EHP needed for survival must be provided by VHP. Shielding is absolutely essential here.

But there is also another less obvious type of situation in which shielding has an advantage. Consider the following example. Your teammate Chucky is currently at her maximum AHP, which let's say is 50. She has no shield, so her VHP is 0 and her EHP is also 50. She is soon to be hit sequentially by two attacks, 10 seconds apart, each one doing 30 damage. If Chucky receives no healing before the second attack, she will therefore die. This is just simple maths: 30 + 30 > 50. Now suppose you have two options: either cast a healing spell, which will increase her AHP by 20; or cast a shielding spell, which will increase her VHP by 20. Either way, Chucky will survive the second attack. In terms of EHP, there's essentially no difference between the two options. At the end of the day, Chucky's EHP will be 10 whichever option you choose (because 50 + 20 - 30 - 30 = 10). The shielding option, however, gives you more *freedom*. The healing spell will only be effective if it is cast *after* the first attack. Casting it *before* the first attack would be pure overhealing and would achieve nothing. On the other hand, the shielding spell may effectively be cast *either* before *or* after the first attack.

Why does this matter? Well, for various reasons, it may be less convenient, or perhaps even impossible, to heal Chucky in the time between the two attacks. For example, you might have to be moving to dodge mechanics between the two attacks, making it more difficult to cast a heal. Or Chucky might have to move outside of your healing range. Or the first attack might also inflict a healing debuff on Chucky, so that healing her before the first attack will be more potent than healing her after. Or it could be that the boss is invulnerable before the first attack, so you have nothing better to do then.

# Benefits and Costs #

So shielding gives you more flexibility than healing. To shield effectively, you needn't wait until after your party has taken damage. For this reason, it is perhaps true to say that, *other things being equal*, shielding is better than healing. However, because the game developers know this, they have ensured that other things generally are *not* equal. Shielding is less efficient than healing.

Scholar's shields take the form of a "buff" called *Galvanise*. This buff is conferred by two spells: *Adloquium*, for single targets; and *Succor*, an AoE. These are both on the global cooldown (GCD). Scholar's most potent healing abilities, by contrast, are *off* the global cooldown (oGCD). These include *Excogitation*, *Indomitability*, and *Lustrate*. In the latter category, we can also include Eos's healing abilities, *Whispering Dawn*, and *Fey Union*. In terms of healing efficiency, GCD abilities are always worse than oGCD spells. The latter have more potency for less cost. They give you "more bang for your buck". Let's compare, for example, *Succor* and *Indomitability*. The total potency of *Succor*, including shield, is 375 (per person), whereas the potency of *Indomitability* is 500. The DPS opportunity cost of *Succor* is one cast of *Broil II*, which has potency 230, whereas the opportunity cost of *Indomitability* is one cast of *Energy Drain*, which has potency 150. Finally, *Succor* costs 2040 MP, whereas *Indomitability* costs zero MP. (Actually, this isn't strictly true. *Indomitability* does have an MP opportunity cost, because *Energy Drain* also refreshes some MP, but it is less than 2040). So, in all these ways, *Indomitability* is simply better than *Succor*. Unless you are in one of the specific kinds of situation described in the previous section, you should *always* prefer *Indomitability* over *Succor*. That is, you should prefer healing over shielding.

To emphasise this last point, let's consider a revised version of the Chucky example which more accurately reflects the potency of the spells/abilities involved. As before, assume Chucky's AHP = EHP = 50 (so VHP = 0), and she is going to be hit by two attacks doing 30 damage each. Now let's say you can shield Chucky for 10 VHP before the first attack and/or heal Chucky for 20 AHP after this attack. Notice, first, that the shield by itself is not enough. If all you do is shield Chucky, then her EHP after the first attack will only be 30, and she will die to the second attack. So you *must* heal Chucky after the first attack. But this healing by itself *is* enough. It makes the shield entirely redundant. Shielding in this situation would just be a waste of resources. You will help your party more by casting *Broil II* instead, conserving your MP and doing more DPS.

I should add an important caveat here. The discussion above assumes that, as a Scholar, you face a choice between shielding and healing. But sometimes this is not the case. Most of your oGCD healing abilities have long cooldowns (*Lustrate* is an exception), and they require Aetherflow stacks. You may, for example, find yourself in a situation where your party needs healing *now* but either *Indomitability* is on cooldown or you have no Aetherflow stacks. In this case, *Succor* may be your only option. (*Emergency Tactics* + *Succor* may also be an option here.)

# Conclusion #

Neither healing nor shielding is better than the other in all situations. Each has its advantages and disadvantages compared to the other. Whether to shield or not to shield depends on the specific situation. This is good, because it means that Scholars have to think about what they're doing. They have to plan ahead and decide on what is the best tool for the situation, rather than blindly spamming *Succor* all the time. This adds depth and complexity to the job, making it more engaging, challenging, and rewarding to play. And this is why I love the job.

<!--  LocalWords:  overhealing AHP VHP EHP UI Overshielding overshielding HoT
 -->
